The industrial revolution began towards the latter part of the 18th century in Britain. It was limited to Britain for about another half century. Yet, by the 19th century, the influence of the industrial revolution spread to the other countries in Europe and the rest of the world. Trade was the major reason for the emergence of the industrial revolution in Europe. When the situation of Europe in the 18th century is analysed, France, Portugal, and Spain other than Britain engaged themselves in colonization and extensive trade. Therefore, it is important to inquire into the reasons why such a revolution began in Britain. Financial and commercial affairs started developing in Europe in the 16th century and by the 18th century, Britain had surpassed some of the other leading European countries such as Holland, France, Portugal, and Spain. As a result, a wealthy class who could invest money in industries was created in that country. At the same time, there was a rapid growth in the population of Britain which resulted in a high demand for goods and in turn producing goods to meet the increasing demand became a challenge. This led to a development in the industrial sector. Further, there was an expansion of the knowledge of science because of the Renaissance that took place in Europe in the 14th and 15th centuries. This knowledge was used in producing new machinery. Minerals such as iron and steel that were necessary in producing machinery too were found in Britain. Not only that, but Britain also easily found things like coal which played a major role in producing energy. Though there was a heavy population in contemporary kingdoms such as France, the development of trade in those countries was limited in comparison to Britain. But Britain had obstructed the commercial relationships of its colonies with other countries in the world by imposing several commercial laws. Thus, Britain was able to maintain a high demand for their productions in its own colonies because they had no other choice than importing those productions from Britain. Some of those products with high demand in Britain were suitable for production using machines. One example is the high demand placed upon British cotton clothes by India. Though there was an increasing demand for British cotton clothes, they did not have the ability to increase the production within a short period with the existing production methods. Because of the high demand that existed for the British productions, there arose a need to increase the production in a short period. It is as a solution to this challenge that there was rapid development in the industrial field. There were several changes in the agriculture field too in contemporary Britain. There, the rich landowners combined small pieces of land that belonged to poor farmers and made large farms. This is termed as the “encroaching movement.” As a result of this, the farmers who lost their land migrated to cities in search of jobs. The extra labour that was generated as a result was able to be used for industrial development. Unlike in other countries, in Britain talented individuals had the opportunity to earn money irrespective of their social status. This free social environment in the attitudes supported the spread of novel ideas and it was conducive for the development of the industrial sector. Further, together with the development of the economy, the emergence of new banks and financial organizations that provided capital for the industries and businesses was seen. The political stability that was prevailing in Britain too helped the industrial revolution. The parliament provided the freedom, tax relief and support to engage in business activities for economic development. Compared with the other countries in Europe, Britain had the most conducive environment for the industrial revolution. Several features such as being a small island, ability to build a web of markets throughout the country, ability to charge high prices for productions and London city being a centre that distributed raw materials, capital, and products, helped Britain to surpass other countries in the industrial production field. Textile producers in Britain faced a challenge of increasing their textile products to meet the high demand that came from their own colonies. Weaving clothes became a little faster with the invention of the flying shuttle by John K. in 1733. But the slowness in preparing threads needed in weaving clothes remained a problem. According to the situation that was there at that time, threads produced by six thread makers per day were enough only for one weaver to work for one day. Therefore, there was some idea of increasing the pace of spinning. As a result of that enthusiasm, a person called James Hargreaves produced a machine called ‘Jenny’ in 1764 for cotton weaving. This machine was a manually operated one. Later in 1769, Richard Arkwright produced a more efficient, water powered spinning wheel. It was named ‘water turbine’. Arkwright’s creation was an important production when compared to the other machines used for the same purpose in the past. But it was difficult to be used in houses because it was very big in size. On the other hand, because a fast tide of water was needed to run the machine, it could be used only in such places where there was a continuous supply of water. Ore deposits are found in abundance in Britain. British people produced iron and steel even before the industrial revolution to make weapons, agricultural equipment, and household tools. They used firewood to smelt ore for this purpose. It was difficult to meet the huge demand for iron and steel needed to produce machinery that emerged because of the industrial revolution using firewood. Hence, alternative methods had to be looked for. In 1730 the method of smelting ore using coal was found by Abraham Darby. They produced moulded iron in this method. In 1784 tempered iron could be produced with the invention of the 'Roller' machine by Henri Cort. Henri Bessemer found a new method to produce steel by removing dirt from iron in 1856. The invention of the open oven method in 1860, by developing the above-mentioned method, enabled the production of high-quality steel. Steel could be produced cheaply and quickly in this method. Making an electric oven to smelt ore by Wilhelm Siemens in 1870 helped the improvement of the iron and steel industry. These new creations paved the way for a rapid improvement in the iron and steel industry. There are so many coal mines in Britain. South Wales, Yorkshire, Lancashire are some places where coal mines are situated. Coal was popular as a cheap and efficient fuel for smelting ore, running machines and household chores. Though the demand for coal increased with the industrial development, mining coal was difficult. Several new inventions were made to find solutions to the problems such as removing the water that gathered in the mine when it was dug deep, poisonous gases found in the depth, increasing heat, and providing light to the depth. Thomas Newcomen invented a steam engine in 1735 to pump water from the mines and artificially cool the air. Yet, it was inefficient and could not be used in other industries too. Therefore, James Watt developed this to a new steam engine in 1736. It was an efficient engine that could be used in many industries. The problem of providing light to the mines too was solved when Humphry Davy produced the safety lamp in 1812. In 1839, a method was found to take coal out of the mines using iron cables instead of the old method of taking them out by women and children using copper cables. The development of the coal industry resulted in several by-products. Tar obtained by burning coal was used in road construction. Paints that were necessary in dyeing clothes too were made with the help of coal. It was further used to produce medicine, perfumes, oil, and fertilizers. The industrial revolution that took place in the fields of textile, coal and iron industries in Britain soon spread into the other fields also. When the nature of this expansion is considered, two types of expansions can be identified as expansion of industrial revolution to other fields and expansion of industrial revolution to other countries. The new knowledge that emerged in relation to industrial and technological fields because of the industrial revolution did not limit itself to industries and productions. It spread to the other fields too. Fields like transport, communication and agriculture too had rapid development under the influence of the industrial revolution. Many changes took place in the transport sector because of the influence of the industrial revolution. With the development of the industrial sector, a necessity of developing a road system arose for transporting raw materials to factories and transporting products to markets. Therefore in 1811, John McAdam introduced a new way of making roads. It is called “the Macadam Method. Even the vehicles that carry heavy loads of goods and passengers could be driven fast and easily on these roads. Therefore, hundreds of miles of such roads were built in Britain and Scotland within a short period. Machines and engines used for transport too developed with the development of roads. The production of the steam engine by George Stephenson in 1814 became a landmark in the industrial revolution. As a result, trains could be used to transport coal and other products. The time spent for transport could be minimized by transporting products from factories to markets and transportation cost was reduced by being able to transport heavy loads of goods at a time. It is believed that George Stephenson who invented the locomotive engine was not able to read and write till he was 17 years old. The development that took place in land transport because of the industrial revolution, affected the naval and water transport too. In 1807, an American called Robert Fulton produced the steamboat. Henry Bell produced the steam ship in 1811 for passenger transport. It used firewood as fuel at the beginning and later coal. The production of motor cars in 1885 by the German, Daimler and the production of the aeroplane by the Wright brothers in 1903, made a huge change in the transport system. Thus, because of the expansion of the industrial revolution, there was a rapid change in all forms of transport; land, water, and air transport. There was a rapid development in the communication sector too in parallel to the development in transport. The postal service that existed in Britain up to this was very costly. A need arose to exchange letters quickly for a cheaper price in a shorter time for business activities. Several experiments to develop communication between two distanced places using electronic methods were conducted from the beginning of the 19th century. As a result of this, an apparatus was produced to communicate using human voice, between two places through cables in 1876. It is called the ‘telephone’. It was produced by Alexander Graham Bell. A new postal service which was called ‘Penny Postal Service’ was started for this in 1840. A letter could be sent to any corner of the country by spending just a penny (pence) through this. There arose another need for sending messages between two places more quickly than sending letters with the rapid development of the industrial and transport sector. As a result of the experiments conducted for this, Samuel Morse was able to start telegraph service in 1844. Sending messages between two places through a cable was started in this method using symbols. An immense change took place in the communication sector in 1895 when Guglielmo Marconi invented the method of sending messages through radio signals and then John Logie Baird invented the television. These two inventions supported not only the development of communication but also the development of trade and commerce including other economic activities. The establishment of factories expanded with the industrialization attracting more people to cities. This left their land in villages uncultivated. The rest of the minor proprietors had to give up their lands due to various reasons. Such small lands given up thus and the lands taken over from other farmers were combined to make mega farms. Agriculture developed because of cultivating these lands which came under the encroaching movement. Change of crops in cultivation helped to reduce spreading of diseases and to increase productivity. Jethro Tull introduced the line sowing method with horse tethered ploughs. This method helped to reduce the number of seeds needed for sowing and increase productivity. At the same time, animal products increased due to the new technological methods used in animal husbandry. One example is the findings regarding breeding of sheep made by Robert Bakewell. The invention of efficient equipment that came with the industrial revolution altered the field of agriculture completely. Machines were produced to clear forests, prepare the land, and produce seeds. Further, paying attention to producing manure to achieve more productivity in agriculture is an important move. As a result of experiments done in this field, a type of manure called ‘Guano Fertilizers’ was produced in Africa for the first time in 1800. Then it was produced in America also. After some time, chemical fertilizers and agro chemicals were produced. Agricultural and animal products could be sold at a cheaper price because they could be produced with less expenditure owing to the store facilities and modern transport methods that came because of the industrial revolution. As a result, there was a high demand for agro products. The industrial revolution that began in Britain spread to the countries in the European continent also within a short period of time. Later it went to Asian, American, and African continents also. There were several reasons for the spread of the industrial revolution to other countries in the 19th century. As a result, other countries in the world too started to speed up their production using machines in the same way England did. Industrial centres emerged in areas that were situated close to markets and where raw materials were found in abundance in Germany and France. Germany, which was able to mark an increased industrial development, had become a powerful country at the beginning of World War I. Then the industrial revolution spread to other European countries like France, Belgium, Austria, Hungary, and Prussia. The Austrian empire-built roads to a length of 30000 miles and Belgium doubled the length of its roads at the same time. Then, every country started laying railways. The effects of the industrial revolution were felt in states in America that existed as colonies of Britain as well. There was a rapid industrial development after independence in that country. Japan was an Asian country which had an enormous development in the industrial sector during the latter half of the 19th century and the first few decades of the 20th century. Japan has become a country that holds a competitive place among the countries that have obtained rapid development in science and technological fields by following the western methods and models. The influence of the industrial revolution was greatly felt in many Asian countries including China, India, and Sri Lanka by the 20th century. Thus, the world became a global village because of the industrial revolution that spread to the other countries in the world and the rapid development it created in transport and communication fields. The industrial revolution resulted in a wealthy class that invested money for profit and an underprivileged class that survived by selling labour. The rich exploited the labour of the underprivileged in their businesses and earned a huge profit. Yet the living conditions of the labourers who worked in factories were very poor. Because of this suppression there were many clashes between the rich and the poor including the emergence of labour unions, boycotts, struggles for rights, etc. This situation ended in the expansion of political beliefs such as socialism and liberalism. Adam Smith presented the concept called “laissez-faire” which led to the expansion of capitalism throughout the world. Laissez-faire means reducing government involvement and giving more allowance for private sector involvement in economic matters. At the same time, as industrialization spread throughout Europe, there arose a need for getting raw materials for a cheaper price and selling the products at a higher price. Therefore, the European countries had to compete for tightening their political grasp in the colonies. This new imperialism which came after 1850 is called neo-imperialism. This struggle of European countries to capture new colonies became a major factor that led to World War I.